stake-pool: Add usage docs (#1277)
solana-labs/solana-program-library: docs/src/stake-pool.md

to maximize censorship resistance and rewards.

## Overview

SOL token holders can earn rewards and help secure the network by staking tokens
to one or more validators. Rewards for staked tokens are based on the current
inflation rate, total number of SOL staked on the network, and an individual 
validator’s uptime and commission (fee).

Stake pools are an alternative method of earning staking rewards. This on-chain
program pools together SOL to be staked by a manager, allowing SOL holders to
stake and earn rewards without managing stakes.

Additional information regarding staking and stake programming is available at:

- https://solana.com/staking
- https://docs.solana.com/staking/stake-programming

## Background

Solana's programming model and the definitions of the Solana terms used in this
document are available at:

- https://docs.solana.com/apps
- https://docs.solana.com/terminology

## Source

The Stake Pool Program's source is available on
[github](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana-program-library).

## Operational overview

The following explains the instructions available in the Stake Pool Program along
with examples using the command-line utility.

> ## Very important note concerning activated stakes

Author: Perhaps that can go in a high-level overview portion as recommended by @brianlong -- I would say it's more important than an Appendix, and a fundamental concept of the program

In its current iteration, the stake pool only processes totally active stakes.
Deposits must come from fully active stakes, and withdrawals return a fully 
active stake account.

Also, the deposited stake account's "credits observed" must match the destination
account's "credits observed". Typically, this means you must wait an additional
epoch after activation for your stake account to match up with the stake pool's account.

This feature maintains fungibility of stake pool tokens. Fully activated stakes
are not equivalent to inactive, activating, or deactivating stakes due to the
time cost of staking. Otherwise, malicious actors can deposit stake in one state
and withdraw it in another state without waiting.

Future iterations of the stake pool program aim to improve on this limitation.

## Command-line Utility

The `spl-stake-pool` command-line utility can be used to experiment with SPL
tokens.  Once you have [Rust installed](https://rustup.rs/), run:
```sh

> $ cargo install spl-stake-pool-cli

Reviewer: Missing pre-requisites for this cargo command. In my case, I see this:
```
% cargo install spl-stake-pool-cli
    Updating crates.io index
error: could not find `spl-stake-pool-cli` in registry `https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io-index` with version `*`
```

Author: Sorry about that, the crate hasn't been published yet, so you'll have to build / run things yourself.  Is that ok?

Reviewer: No worries for me, I'm sure I can figure it out. A non-technical user will see this as a road-block. A quick mention of pre--reqs near the top might help the reader know what to expect.

```

Run `spl-stake-pool --help` for a full description of available commands.

### Configuration

The `spl-stake-pool` configuration is shared with the `solana` command-line tool.

#### Current Configuration

```sh
solana config get
Config File: ${HOME}/.config/solana/cli/config.yml
RPC URL: https://api.mainnet-beta.solana.com
WebSocket URL: wss://api.mainnet-beta.solana.com/ (computed)
Keypair Path: ${HOME}/.config/solana/id.json
```

#### Cluster RPC URL

See [Solana clusters](https://docs.solana.com/clusters) for cluster-specific RPC URLs
```sh
solana config set --url https://devnet.solana.com
```

#### Default Keypair

See [Keypair conventions](https://docs.solana.com/cli/conventions#keypair-conventions)
for information on how to setup a keypair if you don't already have one.

Keypair File
```sh
solana config set --keypair ${HOME}/new-keypair.json
```

Hardware Wallet URL (See [URL spec](https://docs.solana.com/wallet-guide/hardware-wallets#specify-a-keypair-url))
```sh
solana config set --keypair usb://ledger/
```

> ### Example: Creating your own stake pool with 3% fee

Author: Yes, and I'll clarify that the fees go to the owner in the form of pool tokens

```sh
$ spl-stake-pool create-pool --fee-numerator 3 --fee-denominator 100
Creating mint Gmk71cM7j2RMorRsQrsyysM4HsByQx5PuDGtDdqGLWCS
Creating pool fee collection account 3xvXPfQi2SaTkqPV9A7BQwh4GyTe2ZPasfoaCBCnTAJ5
Creating stake pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC
Signature: 5HdDoPssqwyLjt2QvhRbnSATZqFLGKha92zMuJiBUpKeKYKGURRV41N5ydCQxqnFjCud3xv85Z6ghErppNJzaYM8
```

The unique stake pool identifier is `3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC`.

The identifier for the SPL token for staking derivatives is
`Gmk71cM7j2RMorRsQrsyysM4HsByQx5PuDGtDdqGLWCS`. The stake pool has full control
over the mint.

The pool creator's fee account identifier is

> `3xvXPfQi2SaTkqPV9A7BQwh4GyTe2ZPasfoaCBCnTAJ5`. When users deposit SOL into the

Reviewer 2: >  When users deposit SOL into the stake pool ...

I found this sentence a little confusing as the user deposits warmed-up stake accounts into the pool, not just SOL

stake pool, the program will transfer 3% of their contribution into this account.

> ### Example: Create validator stake account

Reviewer 2: This is an "Administrator Example" right?

Author: This is currently a permissionless instruction since it isn't changing the stake pool in any way, but it makes more sense to have it be permissioned.  Added #1419 for that

$ spl-stake-pool create-validator-stake --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC --validator AUCzCaGAGjL3uyjFBtJs7KuJcgQWvNZu1Z2S9G3pw77G
Creating stake account CrStLEWfme37kDc3nubK9HsmWR5dsuVUuqEKqTR4Mc5E
Signature: 4ZUdZzUARgUCPuY8nVsJbN6vRDbVX8sYAQGYYXj2YVvjoJ2oevq2H8uzrhYApe419uoP7QYukqNstiti5p5DDukN
$ spl-stake-pool create-validator-stake --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC --validator 8r1f8mwrUiYdg2Rx9sxTh4M3UAUcCBBrmRA3nxk3Z6Lm
Creating stake account FhFft7ArhZZkh6q4ir1JZMYFgXdH6wkT5M5nmDDb1Q13
Signature: yQqXCbuA66wQsHtkziNg3XadfZF5aCmvjfentwbZJnSPeEjJwPka3M1QY5GmR1efprptqaePn71BTMSLscX8DLr
```

NOTE: These stake accounts have not been added to the stake pool yet. Stake pools
only accept deposits from fully delegated (warmed-up) stake accounts, so we must
first delegate these stakes.

We can see the status of stake account using the Solana command-line utility.

```sh
$ solana stake-account FYQB64aEzSmECvnG8RVvdAXBxRnzrLvcA3R22aGH2hUN
Balance: 1.002282880 SOL
Rent Exempt Reserve: 0.00228288 SOL
Stake account is undelegated
Stake Authority: 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn

> Withdraw Authority: 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn

Reviewer: This is the first mention of `4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn` and they seem to have high-authority. Who holds this key?

Author: I'll clarify this -- this key is the stake pool manager, which defaults to whatever is in your Solana CLI `config.yml`.  Since I was testing with one of my keys, it was chosen.

Generating a new keypair
Wrote new keypair to stake-account.json
============================================================================
pubkey: 4F4AYKZbNtDnu7uQey2Vkz9VgkVtLE6XWLezYjc9yxZa
============================================================================
Save this seed phrase to recover your new keypair:
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
============================================================================
$ solana create-stake-account stake-account.json 10
Signature: 5Y9r6MNoqJzVX8TWryAJbdp8i2DvintfxbYWoY6VcLEPgphK2tdydhtJTd3o3dF7QdM2Pg8sBFDZuyNcMag3nPvj
$ solana delegate-stake 4F4AYKZbNtDnu7uQey2Vkz9VgkVtLE6XWLezYjc9yxZa 2HUKQz7W2nXZSwrdX5RkfS2rLU4j1QZLjdGCHcoUKFh3
Signature: 2cDjHXSHjuadGQf1NQpPi43A8R19aCifsY16yTcictKPHcSAXN5TvXZ58nDJwkYs12tuZfTh5WVgAMSvptfrKdPP
```

Two epochs later, when the stake is fully active and has received one epoch of
rewards, we can deposit the stake into the stake pool.

```sh
$ spl-stake-pool deposit --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC --stake 4F4AYKZbNtDnu7uQey2Vkz9VgkVtLE6XWLezYjc9yxZa
Depositing into stake account FYQB64aEzSmECvnG8RVvdAXBxRnzrLvcA3R22aGH2hUN

> Creating account to receive tokens 34XMHa3JUPv46ftU4dGHvemZ9oKVjnciRePYMcX3rjEF

Reviewer 2: > Creating account to receive tokens 34XMHa3JUPv46ftU4dGHvemZ9oKVjnciRePYMcX3rjEF

Can the user optionally pass in the token address?  Having to parse the cli output to determine the address will be hard to use from a script

Author: Yep, you can use the `token-receiver` param.  I'll add an example for that

Signature: 4AESGZzqBVfj5xQnMiPWAwzJnAtQDRFK1Ha6jqKKTs46Zm5fw3LqgU1mRAT6CKTywVfFMHZCLm1hcQNScSMwVvjQ

> ```

Reviewer: How does the stake pool re-allocate the stake from this account? Does the stake-pool have the authority to remove SOL from the given stake account & redistribute it to the stake accounts for other validators? It will be helpful to see some before & after examples for stake account 4F4AYKZbNtDnu7uQey2Vkz9VgkVtLE6XWLezYjc9yxZa.

Author: There was another question about how to rebalance, so I'll add an example for how to do that.  The concept is that the stake pool manager will have to run their own scripts in order to do that part.

Reviewer: Hopefully, the manager can split the active stake accounts and then delegate those to different validators. I don't think that a deactivation/activation cycle is required (or desired). This will be an interesting area for a skilled manager to maximize uptime/reward from the pool.

Author: There will have to be some deactivating / reactivating unfortunately because of how the staking process works in general.  The big question is more: "how much liquidity does a pool manager need to have available to manage the pool?" And in its current form, they might need quite a bit.

In return, the stake pool has sent us staking derivatives in the form of SPL
tokens.  We can double-check our stake pool account using the SPL token
command-line utility.

```sh
$ spl-token balance 34XMHa3JUPv46ftU4dGHvemZ9oKVjnciRePYMcX3rjEF
0.024058966
```

### Example: Update

Every epoch, the network pays out rewards to stake accounts managed by the stake
pool, increasing the value of staking derivative SPL tokens minted on deposit.
In order to calculate the proper value of these stake pool tokens, we must update
the total value managed by the stake pool every epoch.

The Solana transaction processor has two important limitations:

* size of the overall transaction, limited to roughly 1 MTU / packet
* computation budget per instruction

A stake pool may manage hundreds of staking accounts, so it is impossible to
update the total value of the stake pool in one instruction. Thankfully, the

> command-line utility does all of the work of breaking up transactions.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this detail belongs in a design section rather than the examples section, where the user just wants to know what to do and learn what the expected output should be.

```sh
$ spl-stake-pool update --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC 

> Signature: 3Yx1RH3Afqj5ckX8YvPCRt1DudVP4HuRPkh1dBPvTM9GqGxcB9ZXHGZPADVSZiaqKi166fevMG232EWxrRWswPtt

Reviewer 2: This confused me a little, as the section talks about hundreds of transactions but only one signature is shown here.

Author: The CLI manages to get it all done in one transaction currently, and thus one signature, but we'll need to expand it to potentially create multiple transactions.  Added #1420 for that

```

If another user already updated the stake pool balance for the current epoch, we
see a different output.

```sh
$ spl-stake-pool update --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC 
Stake pool balances are up to date, no update required.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe a quick note as to what happens if `spl-stake-pool update` is not run for an epoch

### Example: Withdraw stake

> Whenever we want to recover SOL plus accrued rewards, we can provide our

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever the user wants to recover SOL plus accrued rewards, they can provide their
```

staking derivative SPL tokens in exchange for an activated stake account.

> Let's withdraw 0.02 of our staking derivative tokens from the stake pool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's withdraw 0.02 of staking derivative tokens from the stake pool.
```

```sh

> $ spl-stake-pool withdraw --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC  --amount 0.02 --burn-from 34XMHa3JUPv46ftU4dGHvemZ9oKVjnciRePYMcX3rjEF

Reviewer 2: The `--burn-from` argument name feels unsettling.  This is "my" stake pool SPL Token account right?  `--withdraw-from`?

> Creating account to receive stake CZF2z3JJoDmJRcVjtsrz1BKUUGNL3VPW5FPFqge1bzmQ

Can the recipient stake address be passed in?  Having to parse the cli output to determine the address will be hard to use from a script

Author: Will change the param.

And the stake address can be passed in, but it's bugged currently since it always splits.  Added #1421 for this

Withdrawing from account FYQB64aEzSmECvnG8RVvdAXBxRnzrLvcA3R22aGH2hUN, amount 8.867176821 SOL, 0.019999999 pool tokens
Creating account to receive stake CZF2z3JJoDmJRcVjtsrz1BKUUGNL3VPW5FPFqge1bzmQ
Signature: 2xBPVPJ749AE4hHNCNYdjuHv1EdMvxm9uvvraWfTA7Urrvecwh9w64URCyLLroLQ2RKDGE2QELM2ZHd8qRkjavJM
```

Our 0.02 pool tokens were taken, and in exchange we received a fully active stake
account, delegated to `2HUKQz7W2nXZSwrdX5RkfS2rLU4j1QZLjdGCHcoUKFh3`.  We can
double-check the status of the stake account:

```sh
$ solana stake-account CZF2z3JJoDmJRcVjtsrz1BKUUGNL3VPW5FPFqge1bzmQ
Balance: 8.869459257 SOL
Rent Exempt Reserve: 0.00228288 SOL
Delegated Stake: 8.867176377 SOL
Active Stake: 8.867176377 SOL
Delegated Vote Account Address: 2HUKQz7W2nXZSwrdX5RkfS2rLU4j1QZLjdGCHcoUKFh3
Stake Authority: 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn
Withdraw Authority: 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn
```

Note: due to truncation on SPL token to SOL conversion, we will not receive the

> exact amount calculated by the command-line utility.

Reviewer 2: Can the cli be changed to show the exact amount received?   This seems like an annoyance the user shouldn't need to have to deal with, and could breed mistrust

Author: I did some refactoring and managed to fix this :-)

We can leave this stake account as it is, or we can deactivate it as a normal
stake account.

> ```sh
> $ solana deactivate-stake CZF2z3JJoDmJRcVjtsrz1BKUUGNL3VPW5FPFqge1bzmQ
> Signature: 816LjrZFPWcdvkeFTBezFxptMoNjUEyVmHQ6bpX7sdZZbzhWKchUyx2MC5VHdXFP7U41B8S7QQfb7hTqDASCqZg
> ```
> 
> Once the stake is no longer active, we can use it as normal SOL.

Reviewer 2: nit: seems unnecessary as now the user is back to the normal staking flow
```suggestion
```

totally remove the validator stake account from the stake pool.

```sh
$ spl-stake-pool remove-validator-stake --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC --stake CrStLEWfme37kDc3nubK9HsmWR5dsuVUuqEKqTR4Mc5E --burn-from 34XMHa3JUPv46ftU4dGHvemZ9oKVjnciRePYMcX3rjEF
Signature: 5rrQ3xhDWyiPkUTAQkNAeq31n6sMf1xsg2x9hVY8Vj1NonwBnhxuTv87nADLkwC8Xzc4CGTNCTX2Vph9esWnXk2d
```

This operation works just like `withdraw`, in that the stake pool manager provides
staking derivatives in exchange for an activated stake account. The difference
is that the validator stake account is totally removed from the stake pool and
now belongs to the administrator.

We can check the removed stake account:

```sh
$ solana stake-account CrStLEWfme37kDc3nubK9HsmWR5dsuVUuqEKqTR4Mc5E
Balance: 1.002282881 SOL
Rent Exempt Reserve: 0.00228288 SOL
Delegated Stake: 1.000000001 SOL
Active Stake: 1.000000001 SOL
Delegated Vote Account Address: AUCzCaGAGjL3uyjFBtJs7KuJcgQWvNZu1Z2S9G3pw77G
Stake Authority: 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn
Withdraw Authority: 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn
```

The SPL token account has been debited to accommodate the removal of SOL from

> the stake pool.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this section could be expanded on.  It's not immediately clear to me how the system prevents a malicious administrator from running `spl-stake-pool remove-validator-stake` on all the stake pools and running away with the SOL

Author: They have to go through the same mechanism as outside users and provide pool tokens in exchange for staked SOL.  Admins can add / remove validator accounts totally though.  I'll clarify that

In order to manage the stake accounts more directly, the stake pool owner can 
set the stake authority of the stake pool's managed accounts.

```sh
$ spl-stake-pool set-staking-auth --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC --stake-account FYQB64aEzSmECvnG8RVvdAXBxRnzrLvcA3R22aGH2hUN --new-staker 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn
Signature: 39N5gkaqXuWm6JPEUWfenKXeG4nSa71p7iHb9zurvdZcsWmbjdmSXwLVYfhAVHWucTY77sJ8SkUNpVpVAhe4eZ53
```

Now, the new staking authority can perform any normal staking operations,
including deactivating or re-staking.

Important security note: the stake pool program only gives staking authority to
the pool owner and always retains withdraw authority. Therefore, a malicious 
stake pool manager cannot steal funds from the stake pool.

### Example: (Administrator only) Set owner

The stake pool owner may pass their administrator privileges to another account.

```sh
$ spl-stake-pool --pool 3CLwo9CntMi4D1enHEFBe3pRJQzGJBCAYe66xFuEbmhC --new-owner 4SnSuUtJGKvk2GYpBwmEsWG53zTurVM8yXGsoiZQyMJn
Signature: 39N5gkaqXuWm6JPEUWfenKXeG4nSa71p7iHb9zurvdZcsWmbjdmSXwLVYfhAVHWucTY77sJ8SkUNpVpVAhe4eZ53

> ```

Reviewer 2: Aligning this interface with the existing `solana stake-authorize` command would be good.  A single `spl-stake-pool authorize ...` that takes:
* `--new-staker` -> `--new-stake-authority <PUBKEY>`
* `--new-owner` -> `--new-withdraw-authority <PUBKEY>`

Author: First one sounds good, but the second one doesn't quite reflect the situation, since it's setting the stake pool manager, who doesn't have withdraw authority over the account.  How about `--new-owner` -> `new-administrator`?
